we still enjoy an incredible level of
privilege and and wealth and that is
fragile we can never take that for
granted and part of not taking that for
granted is that we are part of a very
complicated global system all these
things that are important to us as
Canadians both domestically or
internationally are premised on a secure
global system that system is under
threat but it is real and it is
[Music]
coming hey everybody so today we're
doing a bit of a dive into the state of
the Canadian military and um it's not
just that because it's also a a deep
dive into the state of the Canadian
political situation and then more
broadly I would say somewhat of an
analysis of a very important fragment of
the culture War which is let's say the
relationship between postmodernism and
critical race Theory and Dei Equity
nonsense and the most patriarchal of all
institutions the military and so it's an
issue of broad International
significance with a Canadian Focus um
there's a bit of a crisis in the
Canadian military uh especially with
regards to Personnel retention and
Recruitment and that's emblematic of a
much deeper problem and so we're going
to dive into that problem it's taken me
a while but I found some people from the
Canadian military who are willing and
able to speak Mark Norman from the Navy
Michelle mnu from the Army and Barbara
kage meenu from the Air Force and so
we're all going to to talk today about
the crisis that's facing the Canadian
military and perhaps the military
elsewhere and why the military in Canada
is necessary and what role it's going to
play in the future
and what problems it's suffering from
that can't be let's say easily gathered
under the rubric of Dei emergency
because perhaps that's the last of the
serious problems that's truly facing the
Canadian military let's start sir will
you introduce yourself and I'll I'll go
through all three of you and way we go
thanks Dr Peterson for having me and the
rest of us here my name is Mark Norman
I'm a retired uh naval officer a third
generation uh Canadian military officer
I uh served 39 years in the RO Canadian
Navy starting as a reservist uh mechanic
and uh Rising through the ranks having a
whole bunch of great opportunities to do
a bunch of really fun and some not so
fun things uh over that career I retired
in uh
2019 uh after having commanded the Navy
itself the actual institution of the
Royal Canadian Navy as part of the
Canadian Forces and uh a brief tour as
the vice chief of Defense staff uh the
second in command of of the Canadian
Forces and since then I've been doing a
variety of different things in the
private sector and trying to
um push the narrative and open
discussion dialogue about defense and
security issues in Canada so I really
appreciate being invited here today
thanks sure so I'm Michelle MV I served
35 years in the army cadan army and I
was an armored Core officer so tanker
went through a Military College in uh in
Kingston and then uh my finished uh my
last job in uniform was as the chief of
staff of the NATO headquarters in norfol
Virginia uh which we stood up after a
changed from being a naval headquarters
to a trans information headquarters uh
once I uh I removed the uniform I moved
to uh the civilian service the civilian
National Defense and uh and I became the
I was appointed the academic director
the principal of the Military College in
s Jean which was reopened in
2007 uh did that for 10 and a half years
and uh we actually by the time I left we
got it back up to University level and
uh so retired completely from uh both
those jobs in 201 18 and since then I've
been speaking out as well about uh about
the state of our not just the Armed
Forces but our
country um and uh ended up um anyway so
that's been kind of the the the amount
of work that I've been doing in the last
few years my name is Barbara crossy mov
and I served for 21 years in u the Royal
Canadian Air Force and uh I started in
the early 80s I did not join as an
officer I joined as a private with the
military police
um a trade that women had only been
allowed in for a few years and uh then I
was fortunate enough to go to the Royal
Military College and Royal Roads and
then I became an officer in the
logistics branch and I I served in
incredibly amazing places and I feel
very blessed I retired as I said after
21 years then I spent two years in the
procurement world and uh since then I
still I feel that I would still like to
give back so I do various nonprofit I
work with the Canadian war plane
heritage Museum and um and pretty much
since the whole uh sexual harassment
thing broke in the military I have
wanted to tell you know my side of the
story and I think I speak for the
majority but there's very few people
that are willing to listen so I really
appreciate being here Dr Peterson to uh
be able to have a chance to do that
thanks for having us oh yeah I'm I'm I'm
I'm thrilled that you're here it's an
opport real privilege to be able to
discuss these things and and to come to
I hope some deep understanding well
let's start with the
20,000 foot view I think I definitely
want to delve into the issues of sexual
harassment and and hypothetical sexual
misconduct in the military we and also
I'd like to talk about the role of women
in the military in in a very Frank way
and so because that's a very complicated
problem but let's start with the situ
the state of the military in Canada in
2024 and Mark maybe we'll start with you
if you don't mind so what what issues do
you think are Paramount and and that
Paramount also in a manner that bringing
to public attention would be useful yeah
I think uh it would not be U an
overstatement to describe the Canadian
Air Forces as being in a crisis and that
crisis has many um Dimensions to it um
and it is a very complicated equation uh
to use a mathematical analogy there is
no one single thing um that uh
uh either stands out as being
problematic and by definition wicked
problems as soon as you start to mess
with one element of that equation you
throw the other elements out of balance
so that's the context for my answer
which would be that um we we have at
least three or four significant
strategic challenges um starting outside
and looking in first of all um we we
live in a country that um traditionally
has not really
understood um although it accepts the
need for an armed forces it doesn't
understand why an armed forces is
necessary and those are two different
conversations uh the Global Security
situation we find ourselves in um is
eroding rapidly and uh this is another
aspect of what what I would describe as
it's not a naive on the part of
Canadians RIT large but it is a sense of
um it's not really affecting us on the
part of Machinery of government um we
have an organization that has been
chronically underfunded and under
supported for decades um and and this is
uh both episodic but constant over uh my
entire time in uniform and I'm sure my
friends here would agree um we have a
human resources problem um both in terms
of quantity and quality where um there
are more people there have been until
recently more people leaving the Armed
Forces than joining it the institution
is shrinking and um there are issues
around the the quality of individual
that are being brought into the
organization so we have a quantitative
and qualitative problem as it relates to
um the strength of the Armed Forces and
then as you mentioned in your
introduction we have um broader issues
with respect to equipment uh purchase um
procurement um maintenance um and these
are all combining to create what what I
believe is a genuine crisis and then add
to that um external concerns Around The
credibility um not of the individual
Soldier sailor or or Aviator inside the
Armed Forces but of the institution can
it actually do what it's required to do
um is it credible is it reliable on an
international level and this goes right
too um at the Grand strategic level is
Canada really supporting its military
the way it should right the 2% argument
all these things right down to um is
Canada really there to help um The
Alliance and other key allies and can it
be relied upon and I think that this is
kind of a a messy malange of really
significant concerns going forward so
let me take some of that apart and and
then we'll we'll go to Michelle and then
Barbara
um let's strike at the heart of the
matter so let's say that I'm being a
realist and a
cynic and I might say well why can't
Canada merely ride on the coattails of
the US 10 times our population much
stronger economy outstanding military
they're going to defend Canada when push
comes to shove we're at adding a
relatively small contribution even if we
pulled our fair share pulled our weight
we'd be adding a relatively small
contribution and given the proximity of
the Americans and the fact that we're
under their defense rubric why not just
attend to other things and let the
military shuffle along now that that
goes to your point about being
underfunded and under supported me we've
been able to let's say we've been able
to get away with that so to speak but
you could make a case if you felt like
it that that was a very pragmatic thing
to do given that we have the Americans
on our doorstep so what a
counterargument to that one might be
well you
can't play games with your primary
military Ali without paying a price for
that like so Canada should pull its
weight not least so that our opinion is
given some weight and then I guess you'd
make the same case internationally if
we're not pulling our weight on the
military side
and with regard to our International
agreements why should anyone take us
with any degree of seriousness including
ourselves and I think we've seen that
already massive erosion in the
perception of Canada's
reliability on the international front I
don't think Canadians have any idea how
badly this government has devastated
Canada's International reputation partly
on the military side but but that's not
the only reason okay
so what else would yes before you go on
if I may I agree with everything that uh
that Mark said I see it as a it's a
perfect
storm the the International Security
environment has completely changed we
never thought we'd ever have a state on
State uh War again there's a situation
in Gaza of course uh there are rogue
Nations out there that that are trying
economically and other a lot of other
ways eventually perhaps militarily are
going to try to have the upper hand so
the inter AAL situation is forcing
people across the world to look at their
security situation so that's a huge
thing at the same time as Mark said
there are all these issues within Canada
within the Canadian
Forces uh that are making it currently
we are undefended if I can just say I in
my view we are undefended uh the norite
agreement took too long to get upgraded
so now okay they've made the decision to
do that um and that is now having an
impact as you say on in our standing in
the world and I think one of the things
that Canadians don't understand in terms
of the importance of armed forces is
that they are a means for us to
demonstrate our involvement a ship for
example when a ship goes off and docks
somewhere in any country they're the
greatest diplomatic tool that we can
have because they're there to
demonstrate candidas there uh our
Sailors are fantastic uh diplomats they
get out there and they talk about what
they do they talk about their country
they they spend money in the economy of
that country that they're visiting you
know so that's just a small role but
it's an important one and as you say
right now because we have not been
supporting our Armed Forces they are you
know they're unsupported they're
underappreciated they're uh you know so
the what do you think that does to the
they feel they feel underappreciated
which is yeah and you know they're
they're smart motivated uh patriotic
people for the most part who really love
what they did and they're doing it
because they genuinely believe in it and
when they see that there is not the the
level of support both um politically uh
nationally and even um inside the
institution itself then that becomes
demoralized it is demoralized yeah well
you're going to put your life on the
line you want to make sure that people
are behind you right so so Mike's
intervention was really good for two
reasons one he he may couple really good
points and gave me a chance to think
about how to respond to your your
question I think you laid out some of
the elements of the answer in your own
question in that um back to the essence
of why not why not just you know let the
Americans look after us we we have done
that brilliantly for decades and and I I
I don't think that's an overstatement at
all in fact I could be somewhat
provocative and say that all all of
these governments up to and including
the current government that have played
this game have done so brilliantly the
problem is they've done so in a very
shortterm micro view without
understanding the implications of what
they're doing both in terms of the state
of the institution which some are more
concerned about than others and we can
come back to that but more so to do with
Canada's reputation and what's happening
now is not the Global Security situation
but the expectations have changed it
we're now in a world where the it is not
just security is not just a finite uh
discreet activity it it permeates a
whole bunch of different dimensions of
how Nations and and individuals and
whether they're Rogue States or whether
they're organizations that are Pan
national how they're interacting and
it's not just the traditional physical
notion of a military security has far
broader
implications which means that you need
to be looking at it more seriously more
strategically and looking at all the
elements of it right so right the
military is a key component of that
because it is in essence the insurance
policy it is an overly simplistic um
characterization but it's true now a lot
of people don't have the luxury of
insurance for a variety of reasons but
ultimately but we could afford that
we're not a poor country we are not a
poor country and we have we have
basically traded one degree of
opportunity for another and I'll be more
specific we have underfunded defense and
security and other things infrastructure
a whole variety of other things
nationally um
[Music]
because we have believed that two things
that are now fundamentally flawed the
first one is that there isn't really
it's a threat versus consequence
conversation the probability of
something happening is really really low
and therefore there are other
higher probability problems that need to
be addressed and the second one is the
very premise of your question which was
that the United States will always look
after us well the United States is
basically saying look um yeah we're
Partners here but you are not living up
to your obligations with respect to the
expectations of the partnership the US
have noticed now oh yeah you know they
they knew it well Trump definitely
noticed well well and now we've got
we've got members of the Senate uh
publicly calling out the government of
Canada in an open letter um that doesn't
happen by accident
it would be easy to toss all of your
discipline to the side for the summer
but a life of greatness doesn't happen
by taking the easy route the Hallow app
offers an incredible range of guided
meditations and prayers which are
designed to help you deepen your
spirituality and strengthen your
connection to God for the third year in
a row hallow is having their wildly
popular Saints in s Days prayer
challenge where over the course of four
weeks you'll Journey Through the life of
an incredible Saint learning more about
their faith story and Ultimate Surrender
to the will of God in their life the
challenge will kick off August 5th with
Joe Missoula the coach of the Celtics
and St Sebastian the patron saint of
athletes then Rio Wahlberg will lead
meditations on the life of St Elizabeth
sattin followed by Jonathan roomy
walking through the powerful story of St
Maximillian kby who sacrificed his own
life for the life of another at aitz
closing the series with Father David
Michael Moses and blessed Pierre Georgio
fradi Saints in 7even days goes deep
into the Lesser known part of a Saint's
life to show that while their Journeys
to sainthood were filled with God's
grace and Glory they also included human
struggles great suffering mistakes and a
profound need for God's mercy download
the hall app today at hall.com Jordan
for an exclusive 3-month trial that's
hall.com
Jordan and Mike you said something very
interesting in relationship to Mark's
comments too you you talked about us
being undefended so
let let me expand that a little bit so
it isn't obvious to me anymore exactly
where the prime military threat is and
so what that would mean from a staffing
perspective is that you'd want to have
the smartest and most alert possible
people in your defense team continually
re-evaluating the shifting landscape to
figure out where the threats are you
know so and obviously cyber security is
a walloping element of that and that's a
whole that is really a whole new kind of
warfare and I would say as well that the
emergence of these cheap drones has also
God only knows how radically that's
changed the situation so because they're
unbelievably inexpensive and so that's a
real problem when you send hordes of
them against unbelievably expensive
military equipment
so what would you say we've already
agreed to some degree that the
terminology for the situation that faces
the Canadian military is something
approximating a crisis you laid out four
reasons whyis a perfect storm it's I
mean you know it's it's everything
together and and so when you're talking
about the threats of course and there
are great people in in the military and
in our civilian institutions that are
looking at what the threats are out
there where with cyber security and
there's AI now that's to the four as
well Quantum Computing and everything
and you know there's a need for
digitization uh of of our military which
is happening now under the guise of the
NATO uh I mean the nor upgrade but which
then okay you say so what so the so what
is that you need a range of capability
and the range of capability that's going
to be able to react to all these
different threats now can we have you
know the same kind of range of
capability that the US does no we can't
but we can be a small capable military
that you know that is first of all job
one is protecting Canadians you know and
that goes from you know all the threats
uh the north for example you know we
have a border with Russia frankly you
know there we are I mean it's it's right
there and so so we need a range of
capability to protect our country and
then after that then do we want to
participate and be good International
citizens and participate in our
alliances NATO NORAD of course uh the UN
eventually I mean you have to look at at
that that's that's another another piece
so a military that's that's able to do
everything um it can happen but it has
you know it's obviously not going to be
that was our strength though I think I
mean I think the Americans push comes to
sh well obviously we'll never be on par
with them as far as our military
capabilities but you drop an American
Soldier into anywhere in the world and
there's a lot of opinions that come up
about the American Soldier they're
seeing as parties and I mean Americans
are and I love them I'm very
pro-american but a lot of times there's
a reason why they don't want to talk to
an American and but you put a Canadian
in there whether we had a blue ber on or
not you put oh Canadians you know they
get along with everybody so come and sit
at the table and so we were able to I
think get into open doors and get in
that yeah bridge that Americans were not
as able to as we Canadians can use a
softer touch that's right and I think
that diplomatically even we we are less
offensive and I think everybody would
agree with that that Canadians seem be
less offensive so everybody's willing to
talk to us and how wonderful is that if
there's only one seat left at the table
and they'll let they'll choose a
Canadian because we don't have any
natural enemies so to speak we don't you
know we've we've always proven to be
think good people in general and you
know and and and and freedom and liberty
and all of those things so we're we
don't have a colonial
history you know yeah and so yeah and I
mean I this is just like anecdotal but
but when I was in in the Middle East I
we had we were always trying to be very
very nonpartisan so if we did something
on the Israeli side we had to be sure to
do it on the on this on the Syrian side
and this got to be like there was was
very hard to keep track of and I
remember saying at one point wouldn't it
be nice if if someday we could actually
do this and have you know the Canadians
and the syrians and the and the Israelis
and the austrians whoever else were with
us and without in the blink of an eye
this very seasoned you know IDF Soldier
turned to me and said that could only
ever happen in Canadian mess so there
you know and it was kind of that feeling
that was our reput that was our
reputation past tense
is what's what's changed in in I think a
fundamental way is not the not
necessarily the caliber of the
individual Canadian uh Soldier military
leader however we want to describe it
what has changed is the uh more Global
perception of what Canada represents or
doesn't represent and and there was
always this sense that Not only was the
individual or group of individuals not
only were they incredibly competent and
capable but that the nation that we they
represented actually you know stood for
something was on the right path whatever
that was at the time and that they were
going to get something done there was
going to be some useful contribution to
whatever the issue was of the day that
was trying to be resolved and and that
is I would say no longer the case or if
it is it is it is so rare and isolated
that why why what's changed well we I
think we've we've lost our way uh in ter
terms of who we are what we stand for
what what what we what we see as our
role
internationally we have we have biased
our political rhetoric uh so far towards
the notion of social values and those
those ideas that we have lost sight of
what is in our national interest and we
are we're trying yes well we're not even
sure that there that having a national
interest is something that's worth uing
anymore right I me our prime minister
defined us as not having a national
interest he's obviously very
internationally oriented so it isn't
even obvious that our leadership at the
top level considers the nation state an
institution that's worth preserving well
if we're a postnational state frankly
you don't need to have citizenship you
don't need to really have a passport
that recognize you as Canadian you know
so our need National institions you know
you don't need National institutions and
and uh and you don't necessarily uh
participate and you know I mean you look
at our country what what potential we
have the potential we have first of all
let's talk about even just our two
languages okay the fact that our we have
a Canadian uh French and English kind of
you know those two official languages
when our officers or soldiers go off and
sailors and and a men and women go off
to to missions a lot of them are able to
speak you know both of them and so
they're able to diplomatically just
think of what that does I mean you're
most Nations that you participate with
you know our American friends you know
can't do that uh we can we can Sidle up
to to the French to the belgians to you
know in the NATO Nations even there it's
uh afca in Africa for French poia French
Polynesia there you go you know and so
look at the strength so you're making
you are making a case that Canada has a
particular positive role to play
independently like in the world in and
of course that Canada does have a
history of that and a very effective
history of that independent of of the
specific defense requirements of Canada
and that's part of what would you say
maintaining and promoting Global Peace
but also part of putting Canada out
there as a credible nation state that
should be taken seriously as player that
has an opinion and that's able to
actually participate not only
participate but inter intervene when
required and it's very difficult and
let's go back to an earlier question
that you posed to us in the context and
I'm I'm paraphrasing you know why why is
this important to Canadians H from a
from a what's the threat perspective I'm
not going to sit here and list a whole
bunch of um boogey men perceived or the
Chinese Communist party so yes there
that's a real one yeah definitely but I
think it's important for your viewers to
understand that this is not a monolithic
uh binary conversation this is a
continuous of concerns and the I i' I'm
on the public record of saying do I
believe that somebody is going to attack
Canada or invade Canada in a traditional
military sense I think the probability
of that is extremely low however do I
believe that other
powers um are going to use military
capability to influence something
halfway around the world or even in our
own backyard that is is in our national
interest 100% absolutely all the time
this this is the
naive that concerns me because we see we
have traditionally seen the conversation
about military capability in Canada
through the lens of you know we live uh
we live in a fireproof house uh with no
flammable materials immediately around
us right or whatever the saying is but
the reality
is no it's not about our house it's
about our
lifestyle we we enjoy maybe not as much
as we have in the last several decades
but we still enjoy an incredible level
of privilege in our
lifestyles and that is dependent on a
whole series of international systems
and those International systems are all
under threat they're under threat from a
military perspective they're under
threat from a political perspective
they're under threat from an economic
they're under threat from a sociological
perspective and the more that we
erode um our ability to protect those
systems the more vulnerable we become
not to an invasion but it's Invasion it
is it's it is it's a it's virtual it's a
virtual or ideological Invasion as
opposed to a physical attack against the
nation and this is why this is such an
important conversation and it is timely
as Mike said because we really are
seeing uh arguably you know a
generational situation where um you know
we're we're extremely vulnerable we're
not paying attention we're not keeping
track of what's happening in the big bad
world yeah and um we're so inwardly
focused and understandably focused on
our own domestic problems that we're
losing sight of what's Happening we're
also focused on weird domestic problems
Barbara let's bring you in on this
because this really started to come this
came to my attention last year let's say
and it's been mounting it came to my
attention be because I came across a
couple of articles in the Canadian milit
primary Canadian military journal and
they were hypothetically academic
articles and I read them
and well and so the pro you mark you
listed a variety of problems with the
Canadian military and none of the
problems you listed are the problems
that um the new chief of Defense staff
is planning to what would you say
address the fundamental problem that she
seems to be wanting to address is sexual
misconduct in the military okay now so
so here's the problem I have with that
from a diagnostic
perspective the first issue is I'm sure
there are instances of sexual misconduct
in the Canadian military but I'm not
sure at all that there are more more of
those in the Canadian military than
there are in the typical University for
example and so in fact my suspicions are
that there would be substantively less
and the reason I think that is because I
know perfectly well that the Canadian
military tilts towards the recruitment
of Highly conscientious people and
they're less likely to do those sorts of
things so I'm sure there's plenty of it
because we're putting young men and
young women together in very stressful
circumstances and they're going to
misbehave and that'll also be true of
some of the people who aren't you know
mere recruits but that's not the issue
the issue is is it more prevalent in the
Canadian military and is is that the
crisis and then the next issue is let's
say there is a problem then it isn't
clear to me that there is but let's say
there is well what's the solution well
the other thing I ran across in
reviewing these papers is the solution
is the same damn Dei Solution that's
being applied to everything and so I
don't see this as a diagnosis of what's
wrong with the Canadian military what I
see it is as is an extension of the
fundamentally leftist radical postmodern
neo-marxist presuppositions that are
destabilizing all our institutions being
focused on you know removing the
patriarchy from the military which I
can't imagine a more wooly-headed or
ill-
advised diagnosis and solution than that
especially given all these other
practical problems that you've described
so let's delve into that a little bit so
I don't know where to start with that so
I could just start by saying I think
that with Jenny or general Kon that was
the job she's coming from that was
created the chief um culture and uh
personal conduct that was being revamped
and that command was created to address
I think the sexual misconduct things
that were coming out of that so it is my
hope that she disbands that as her first
her first job as the CDs and I will
happily go on record as saying that so
you think there's any chance of that
that I don't know that I don't know um
because I you know just to stop you for
a minute your your initial premise was
wrong I think okay when you said she's
going in there to promote that as CDs as
chief of Defense staff I'm sure she
knows as well as all of us that her job
is to be the chief of Defense staff to
command the Armed Forces to you know to
make them operational but that had been
her job that she came from you're
absolutely correct that was created so
so but it's this radical Progressive
agenda and like they just it's been
imposed right on every every facet of
Canadian life and you know academics
some embraced it as you know academic
like they lot did and but to impose it
on the Canadian Forces I I shake my head
if the warrior culture we have to stamp
it out oh my God if there's one place
you want to have a warrior culture
wouldn't it be in your Canadian Forces
wouldn't it be in your military like
seriously anyway so dealing with the
sexual misconduct so I you know when it
first came on and and I'm going to say
without hesitation there are predators
in every organization and predators they
should be rooted out prosecuted and
given the boot absolutely are is every
man that wore a uniform or or even the
majority I never encountered it so as I
said I joined in uh the early 80s women
were allowed in the military police for
just a couple of years I was often the
only woman in the truck you know in the
tent on the truck whatever and it didn't
happen to me were there jerks absolutely
and there were women jerks that I worked
with l
but but it just didn't happen and so
what bothers me the most is when I hear
this is not that it happened but first
of all they say that it happened and
that nobody did anything about it and
they had nowhere to turn that I have a
real hard time with because I can tell
you that if a bunch of times when an
inappropriate remark was made to me I
don't know about my how I looked at my
uniform or whatever as I I took that
remark in and I thought about it before
I had a chance to respond the guy next
to me said hey buddy that's not cool you
you know and that happened all the time
that didn't happen just with Canadians
that happened with our allies and I was
very lucky to work with a lot of our
allies and I it just wasn't if you have
no experience with the military and you
read you know the the Legacy Media and
you see it like you know you wouldn't
want your child anywhere near that
organization because it's this you know
misog tox yeah you see that now we all
have friends who you know either their
kids or to get older maybe grandkids are
considering the military and you get
this question it it it's in our circle
is you and the Catholic Church well it's
would you really you know is it is it
safe yeah and it it it's gut-wrenching a
to hear the question you can
intellectualize the question and then
you have to as Barb is saying that's
also got to be radically demoralizing
especially for the good people who
aren't involved in this sort of thing
that's you know and and and it so we
look at what's happened so oh going to
root them out and what have we got so
far we've got three senior officers that
I'm that are thinking off the top of my
head gentlemen who are were were they
found guilty no they weren't but the the
the careers in you know of art McDonald
Danny fan Steve whan are over and their
family and their family circumstances
and what happened some some historic
weird event when everybody was drunk on
a boat and nobody and there's no
Witnesses but these men they're done and
I think that's I think well Drunk On A
Boat is also relevant you know so I
studied antisocial behavior in
relationship to alcoholism for like 15
years and so one fact that you can lay
on the table instantly is that if there
was no drunk people there would be
virtually no sexual assault AG so if you
actually serious about sexual assault on
University campuses or in the military
the first thing you would focus in isn't
culture and it isn't personality it
probably isn't even the Predators it's
probably Al alol so we we address this
like a long time time ago like you know
I've been out for a long time but I
remember we had uh it was called sharp
sexual harassment and and racism racism
prevention and these courses were in the
early 80s and so it's not like this was
oh look at we haven't done anything
about it we've been working we've been
going with the time since then and and
changing our culture and alcohol was a
big part of the military culture in
those days and that's changed that
started changing even even with the
younger you know when Fitness became a
thing kind of and the and stopped being
like but I can remember going to the
mess and you had to drink whatever and
and that changed so we have moved with
the times but I you know it doesn't mean
it doesn't mean these problems don't
exist yeah of course but as you but as
you said in your and and you know to
Barb's point it it how much how much of
an emphasis and and amplification do we
want to put on the existence of those
problems well we might want to first of
all demonstrate that they're real like
and the way you do that is by
comparative analysis and I don't see any
evidence of that so there there the the
problem of sexual misconduct is real the
problem of alcohol fueled sexual
misconduct is real is that particularly
typical of the Armed Forces in Canada I
doubt it you need overwhelming proof
before you made that your primary
concern now on the Alcohol side too I
have a question about that you know I I
was thinking about that a lot this week
because what alcohol does is it Narrows
your focus to the present and it makes
you opaque to threats essentially so
it's quite fun in that regard because it
allows you to be enthusiastic without
any concern for the future now the
problem with that is you tend to act
like a jackass now but there's an
advantage too it's like because I wonder
about this when you
have men and women who are on the front
lines and they're putting their life at
risk and they've been there for like a
week and a half I used to think this
about the oil riggers in Alberta too
they go off and they have a couple of
days off and they want to blow off some
steam and so they have a rius party and
rius parties are where stupid things
happen but but but having said that I
don't exactly understand how much steam
you do have to blow off in order to be
able to tolerate the life that you're
leading that high stress anything is
possible at a moment's notice life and
so I don't know how
much off duty discipline let's say it's
reasonable and realistic to insist upon
now
you know I've already said I know what
alcohol contributes to these sorts of
situations but by the same token you
know it's like how much do people need
to let off steam and so I'm I'm kind of
curious about what you think about that
you've been you've been around men in
those situations for for a very long
time um and and I'll say again I mean
you're right and and it's whether it's
uh in the officer's mess or the privates
mess or the office Christmas party um
that kind of Stu but so so I know and
there was a lot of uh the drinking went
on and but I honestly I never felt
threatened and I none of they and so you
would be in a mess I'm thinking up in
the goine heights for example there's
maybe 40 or 50 and there's two girls
three girls three women up there and uh
and I I didn't see it I saw them getting
like getting drinking too much perhaps
and then out came the arguments over the
Maple Leafs versus the Canadians and
singing the regimental songs and and
somebody got you know when the karaoke
machines came out it was bad news and
then it was but you were still if you're
on a military base there's still
regulations right the mess closes
everybody go goes back and you're
sleeping in your quarters and so I
honestly I saw more sort of fist fights
break out than I saw kind of a sexual
anything with a sexual overtone and
things have changed since then as well
by the way I mean you know all our
missions now are are essentially you
don't drink they're they're dry missions
all Afghanistan was all dry except when
you got off the island off the uh the
mission and went into Kuwait or or
wherever ships are all dry now right I
mean when they're at Sea when they're at
Sea so when they pull up into into Shore
then you have parties and you have uh so
on and so forth so that's been rectified
things have changed a lot I mean when I
was commanding officer from you know 89
to
91 already started some young officers
saying well no I don't want to go to
happy hour in my day you know when I was
a young officer it was you know on
Friday nights you go to happy hour
here's a beer here's a cigarette you're
going to smoke you're going to drink and
that's is you know I'm exaggerating
obviously but but uh by the time you you
know so early 90s then you know young
men and women were becoming more fit I
said no I you know a glass glass of
orange juice and that'll be just great
and they you know it's 6 o' I'm going
home that's it you know in the old days
we'd party till 11: every Friday night
so there so the evolution of uh I I say
generational evolution of these aspects
of of let's call it the organizational
culture because I know you want to talk
about culture to some degree they've
evolved and they've evolved D um as much
because of the participants in the
culture as they have from
organizational dictum um you know
there's been a sense of okay we need to
modernize this um but a lot of people
are finding other outlets for that um
letting off steam as you characterized
it a lot of it is there is a lot of
Fitness there's it's different it's
different as it is in society it's
different but that doesn't mean it still
doesn't happen it doesn't mean that
people are still not going to get drunk
and do stupid things there there's a
difference between getting drunk and
doing stupid things and getting drunk
and doing nasty malicious um uh things
um and and that's where and this is it
is hard in in the premise how do you
make that distinction well you you have
to say you have to establish expected
Norms of behavior and those evolve over
time what was acceptable 30 20 years ago
um I is not necessarily acceptable not
because it's politically correct but
just because we we've changed so you
know um drinking at Sea I use that as an
example I I was the one in fact that
that banned drinking at sea for a
variety of reasons including and I the
way you characterized your your previous
research experience was it was like deja
vu it was the senior non-commissioned
members of the Navy at a
board meeting who who said to me Admiral
we're telling you 99% of our problems
are alcohol related all this misconduct
you can bend it all into if they weren't
drunk at the time the chances of them
having done whatever it was was pretty
slim to none so there's there's the you
know there there go my people I am their
leader so I must follow them this is
what you you were getting this from the
from the
[Music]
the senior leadership the the the senior
non-commission they're telling me we
have a problem and we need you Admirals
wearing your big pants to do something
about it so we said okay let's look at
this let's study it to the best we can
in the context of our own little
ecosystem and let's come up with some
Progressive approaches that didn't ban
it entirely because that would be
punitive reason and and just silly and
that doesn't just accept the status quo
but says okay you know what drinking a c
is dangerous first of all because you're
operating extreme it's like Dr it would
be using your oil rig analogy they don't
allow them to drink on an oil rig for
very good uh reasons so they can keep
their hands right or not kill somebody
accidentally because they're drunk um so
let's how about that as a thought
process and yes so that that evolved
over time um but I think we also have to
remember that the military the armed
forces are more generally conservative
so for change to happen they used to say
what was it the it's the only thing
harder than getting a new idea in the
military mind is taking out an old idea
you know and it's but but it's true it
changes slowly but the Navy hundreds of
years tradition not impeded by progress
exact kind of jokes they're jokes
somewhere they come from somewhere and
in fact so so you have to but you know
you look at this evolution of of alcohol
and and all that and it's it's uh and so
is there a big culture change required
I'm with Barbara I think uh no I I think
you know you need to make sure that
people understand that uh you know that
that you have to you know respect others
and uh in in all kind of ways and
everything and and you root out those
those Predators but and you're not alone
that was the big thing that's the
hardest thing for me when I see on TV
when something happened a victim says
this happened to me there was nowhere to
turn to and I I have a real hard time
with that because the military okay it's
huge it's a family you got you've met
people throughout your whole even if
you've been in two or three years you've
got people you were on this course with
or trained with and so your chain of
command is not welcoming to your
complaint a failure leadership it that
barb to your point when you see these
things they are fundamentally failures
in
leadership are you tired of feeling
sluggish run down or just not your best
self take control of your health and
vitality today with balance of nature
with balance of nature there's never
been a more convenient dietary
supplement to ensure you get a wide
variety of fruits and vegetables every
day balance of nature takes fruits and
vegetables they freeze dry them turn
them into a powder and then they put
them into a capsule the capsules are
completely void of additives fillers
extracts synthetics pesticides or added
sugar the only thing in balance of
nature fruit and veggie capsules are
fruits and veggies right now you can
order with promo code Jordan to get 35%
off your first order plus get a free
bottle of fiber and spice experience
balance of nature for yourself today go
to balance of nature.com and use promo
code Jordan for 35% off your first order
as a preferred customer plus get a free
bottle of fiber and spice that's balance
of nature.com promo code Jordan for 35%
off your first preferred order plus a
free bottle of fiber and
spice so so you pointed out very early
on that you hadn't experienced the sorts
of things okay but I'm wondering too
like there's a cultural element to that
a sociological ele element let's say but
there's also a personal element like
I'll give you an example of this
Daughters of Alcoholics are much more
statistically likely to marry
alcoholics now we don't know why that is
we don't know if they find men who are
drinking and because that they're
accustomed to that they pick those men
or we don't know if they covertly
reinforce their husbands for drinking to
the point where they become alcoholic
but it's such a widespread phenomena
that if you're doing genetic analysis of
the transmission of alcoholism you have
to take into account this issue of
assortive mating it's called okay so
now the the issue is was there a manner
in which you conducted yourself
personally that made you less likely to
be the target of such unwanted attention
that might have to do with alcohol
consumption and then also is it
reasonable to assume that your
experience is emblematic of the
experience of females in the military or
were you for for whatever reason
protected personally or more
fortunate um so first of all women that
joined the military I think tend to be
well certainly in my time they tended to
be like not everybody's going to want to
join the military so I think that maybe
they're a little bit more outspoken I
don't know um I would say that like it
didn't happen to me but I didn't see it
happening around me and I was close to a
lot of women in the military and nobody
you were there early yeah and but nobody
came like even at the end of my career
when I was in ndhq and and you like
nobody would I I didn't hear about
people saying this happened to me you
know what are we going to do about it I
think that the majority of women it
didn't happen to and I think that the
ones that did yes absolutely they should
they should you know seek justice but I
also think that to say there was nowhere
to go I mean you had your peers you had
your the Padres we have Padres that
doors open all the time you had a
medical staff you had um somebody that
you worked with on a course you had
there was so many avenues that yeah the
the physical training guys that and
girls like there were so many places
that you could go for help I find it
astonishing when I hear this happened to
me and it happen to me over and I had
nowhere to turn to that I I really have
a hard time with that I really so now
when you entered the
military what
response what response did you get from
the man well okay so we don't and and we
put okay so nowadays you wouldn't have
like our Lockers in the military police
like it wasn't a changing locker but we
kept our gun in there and like you know
our ticket books and all that sort of
stuff so you were never there undressed
but so we were all together men and
women and there wasn't one Locker that
didn't have Miss January or whatever you
know in the thing so nowadays that's
just not cool and So I responded to that
by going getting member Bert Reynolds in
Cosmopolitan and I put him up in my
locker and we never had a problem with
that again you know like it just you
know the GU I'm not looking at that
every day so well and then that was it
and then and and it took a while but I I
think that I I didn't I don't think it
was hostile I think it was more um they
didn't know how to act I had a flat tire
once in my police car in Edmonton you
know how cold it is there I a flat tire
nope I know how to change the tire so
I'm changing the tire and I do see
another military police car go by fine
change the tire I Comm in the usual
ribbing you know just like the guys
would get but this one um military
police Corporal he's waiting he's
waiting at the end he says barbar he
said listen he said I drove past you
today I said yeah I saw you and he said
I didn't know what to do right right he
said if it had been Mike I would have
stopped to help him but I thought you
were going to say you think I can't do
this didn't I don't I didn't know what
to do and I said next time stop effing
car kind of thing and we were cool after
that right and and but that was the kind
of things that I was they didn't really
know what to do they didn't really know
how to deal with it and and this idea
that we're men and women are
interchangeable I have a hard time with
that too okay so I want to really have a
hard time with that well let's talk
let's talk a little bit about
that so I might as well get myself
trouble right off the bat
so I spent a lot of time in Academia and
I could see it tilting in the manner
that it has tilted the same manner that
in principle the military is now
predetermined to tilt on the cultural
side and I've been trying to sort out
exactly why that is now I've seen a lot
of infantilization of students a lot
like way too much and infantilization of
Faculty for that matter and so and then
I wonder like
if you introduce women on Moss into an
administrative institution to what
degree does that infantilize the
situation and like I don't know the
answer to that neither does anyone else
because we haven't introduced women on
mass into administrative institutions
before about the last 60 years so we
have no idea exactly what's going to
happen and you so there's going to be
female social pathologies just like
there are male social pathologies and
infantilization seems to me to be a very
high probability outcome so now and
that's definitely not something that you
want in the military it's bad enough in
academic institutions and and and you
just also pointed out that you don't
believe that men and women are
interchangeable now I have a gut
reaction
to women on in Frontline combat now for
a variety of reasons I I think the
primary reason is the consequences for
women if they get captured as prisoners
of war that just doesn't seem to me to
be
that's not an acceptable situation as
far as I can see I could I could be
convinced otherwise but you've been in
the military a very long time and you
believe that there are intractable
differences let's say between men and
women absolutely and I I obviously like
your you gentleman's opinion on this too
women are half the workforce and they're
half the intellectual power and being
able to capitalize on what women have to
offer is a major deal we know that more
educated women have more educated
children that's not true for men by the
way so it's female educ ational
attainment that predicts children's
educational attainment not male and we
know that countries that educate women
and that make their inclusion in the
workforce a priority are much more
likely to thrive economically so we know
all that but we don't know exactly how
to integrate men and women for example
into the military because that's a tough
nut to crack so what has your experience
taught you about that what role can
women play well or better even possibly
I think that so women when I joined I
think we were at coming up on 10 % and
since then this 25% women has been
bandied about forever and we we maxed
out at I think 15 16% where we are now
and we're not getting any more than that
so it's like Engineering in that regard
so so what do I think so I think that
women there's a role for women but to
say that you can you know you can
interchange you can take the the guy out
of the Battalion off the ship and just
replace him with a woman that's not
always true and I believe that and I and
I I think it come for me it comes down
to meritocracy in the specific um
work trade element trade that you have
so military police here we go again so
this so we had um we have living
quarters on the base so there's children
there's you know women wives whatever
and things happen so we still had the
Airborne school so when there was a bar
fight for example and there was a lot of
them I am quite certain that if we are
honest with each other you are rather
going to have one of you as a partner
going into a bar fight than me and you
know what me too than I would rather not
have another woman as a uh as a partner
however we also had things like a sexual
assault or a um an abusive relationship
or a child who was who was assaulted and
then in that instance I'm pretty sure
that you guys might rather have me come
to make the first to talk to the the
woman who's been beaten up or the child
who's been abused and so there's room
for both and this idea what about on
foreign relations and diplomatic front
are there roles that women play in the
military that are yeah and unfortunately
though we go there as assuming that
everybody's as wonderful and free as we
are so so you know I went to Syria I was
negotiating the million dollar contracts
and they wouldn't talk to me because I I
had un uniform on and I was but I was a
woman and it was you know so I had to go
get my little driver my 18-year-old New
Finland driver and he had to come in and
he's ma'am I don't know if I should be
signing the just signed them and you
know because they refused to deal with
us right right right so you're still
deal so that's a disadvantage what about
on the Advantage side in in in in
foreign relations on the battlefield uh
I would say in foreign relations I I
would say that we were a novelty still
to a lot of uh different like the polls
the the Polish Battalion we were a bit
of a novelty even in the austrians and
so they would and and Men traditionally
and I'm going to say this I'm going to
make a blanket comment that the majority
of men are still there kind of the
gentlemen like they're going to want to
open pull out the chair you not sit down
and so so I mean if you were smart you
use that to your advantage I know I did
and and it was uh you know and
then I think that
women they calm things down a bit too
like if there's an argument going on and
there's you know the austrians are
fighting we had the austrians and the
polls were always fighting then when the
women came in to sit down the men sort
of toned it down because they were
gentlemen inherently and so that was an
advantage for women what when you when
you look at a problem or you have a an
issue and whether it's a you know
strategic operational tactical issue or
whatever you you will want to get as
many opinions as possible you want to
consult if you have time let's say if
you're trying to take a hillover you
sometimes don't have time but if you're
if you're considering an issue a problem
a challenge it's always going to be good
to have different ways of viewing that
issue and getting different opinions on
how to solve that issue having women in
the forces is a strength I mean there's
no doubt about it the issue comes to
what you're talking about combat roles
you know on a ship on in a submarine uh
fighter aircraft
I mean I think uh it's very difficult
but in my view if a woman wants to do it
who the heck am I to say she can't if
she meets the standards that's just
great but she has to meet the
standard now what I do the second order
effect of that though is so so what do
you do when people say well if the
standards discriminate against women
then the standards are sexist because
that would certainly be the case for
upper body strength for example
generally speaking they yeah but there
are jobs where you need the upper body
strength so to be in the armored Court
to lift a you know 100 PB you know uh uh
bullet round uh you know you need the
strength to be able to do it I'm sure in
in the Navy there's lots of of those
kinds of uh of jobs but but what I was
going to say is that the second order
effect is on the leadership now the
young sergeant and the young left tenant
now has to command you know his section
of 10 people some of which are women and
it's now he or she has to have and and
sometimes it's a she that is going to
command that has to have a a different
kind of approach you can't you can't
can't be the old sergeant of the old
days or pushups and that's it you know
and dirt bag and and all it's it's a
different story so those are challenges
that now I I never had to you know I got
out 15 years ago so I I never actually
you know had was faced with that but but
it's uh it's a different challenge today
you see I I I see this and I at the risk
of oversimplifying it um it's kind of
like a V diagram in my head so you've
got what I would describe as the
technical skills of whatever the the
trade the
occupation um then there are the
physical requirements which might be as
much what we would call in our business
environmental so they're different when
you're when you're in a tank or you're
in a it's different than being on a ship
but there are there are physical
requirements that are there and then
there's this
um I I would argue IL defined sense of
the social part of it I'm just going to
put social in quotes because I'm not I'm
not educated in that regard but it's all
this other stuff and and it's where the
all the other stuff gets weird because
people either don't know how to deal
with it and you can have all the
training you want but there are
realities to these social Dimensions
they're not just gender specific but
there are social aspects to how
militaries function um and uh some
people are very skilled at those maybe
not as physical very technical skilled
other people are very strong um very
technically skilled but have social is
and I don't know it's a very I go back
to none of these things are in my view
none of these things are as black and
white as well they're very complex
issues well so for example you you
mentioned that the Canadian military's
topped out at about 15% females and that
that's become that's quite intractable
okay so exactly the same thing is the
case among engineers in in the
Scandinavian countries they've gone
farther than any other countries on the
planet to equalize gender opportunities
but there are intractable differences on
the engineering side and on the nursing
side okay so now you might ask why that
is now men and women are pretty much the
same in terms of raw cognitive ability
the male curve might be a little flatter
so there might be more extreme male
Geniuses and males who have cognitive
problems there's some debate about that
men and women are about equal in
conscientiousness which is the next best
predictor say for administrative
managerial and military jobs but men and
women differ radically in their
interests it's the biggest difference
between men and women and men are much
more likely than women to be interested
in things and women much more than men
to be interested in people and that's a
major determina of Occupational choice
and it really stands out in the
difference between Engineers thing
oriented and nurses people oriented and
so given the nature of the military the
engineering like nature of the military
the probability that without undo Force
we're going to get to 50% women strikes
me as zero now and the the idea that the
ideologues have that that's a cultural
issue is nonsense because the other
thing that's been demonstrated in
Scandinavia this is so
cool imagine you rank ordered Nations by
how egalitarian their social policies
are okay now you looked at them in terms
of differences between male and female
in occupational Choice okay the biggest
differences are in the most egalitarian
countries so if you free women and men
up so that there aren't systemic
barriers to their movement into an
occupation the occupational differences
magnify they don't don't decrease right
and that's I think that's unshakable
finding right so there's no amount of
cultural gerrymandering that's going to
bring women up to 50% in the military
it's a foolish goal and it's based on a
misapprehension of how human beings
function the ideologues think we're all
socially constructed and that's nonsense
if you flatten the playing field men and
women maximizing their differences so
and that's what you'd expect for people
who are pursuing their Destiny freely
and accordance with their own interests
and it does seem to be interest we don't
exactly know what interest is you know
from a scientific perspective why women
would tilt towards people you know
except broad nurturing the nurturing
right we don't know how that manifests
itself saying day-to-day choices exactly
which is I find a bit ironic in some
respects
because if if you were from an Insider's
perspective if you were to characterize
the military don't care for people much
we well in theory okay we we would
describe ourselves as a people Centric
organization yeah which is fascinating
um yeah yeah sure there's a lot of stuff
a lot of things a lot of it's fraternal
right and so you know I I just I was
quite struck by what you said yeah well
I think there's a difference between
tells me we're doing something
fundamentally wrong no I well I think
there's there's fraternal hierarchy
and there's community of care and I
don't think those are the same thing
okay yeah yeah so men like men can
organize themselves but when men
organize themselves they organize
themselves into into hierarchies right
and then and and so that's not a
community of care exactly the best
leaders I think obviously will have care
for their people yeah I mean and that
that whole nurturing thing I think is
not just a part of the women but you're
right perhaps you know uh what do you
call it um U comes in with men it comes
in mentoring right it comes in mentoring
and I think the best leaders who care
for their people and you know want to
you know see them do well and uh I I
always described you know sometimes
being in charge and being with your team
there's this I can describe it as Love
Actually you know and I loved my people
that I when I commanded them and that I
had in in my group and and you know
sometimes people are kind of you know
love Yeah well it's a kind of love you
want to hug them you want to you know
keep so I talked to Joo willink who's a
Navy SEAL and we talked three or four
times and Joo he's about like 3 feet
thick he's he's like a man's man that's
for sure and Joo wanted to be a soldier
from the time he was like three you know
he's blowing things up when he was three
and he told me quite frankly that you
know he was a pretty rough Adolescent
and he could have taken a criminal
pathway but he went to the military and
one of the things that he found very
rapidly was that opportunity to Mentor
was the best thing he'd ever found in
his whole life and that that ethos of of
care among men does seem to make itself
manifest in that mentoring and I think
that's that's I hope my people do well
is different than I want to protect my
people right right I mean you do want to
protect but it's not this it's not the
same emphasis right there's an
encouragement emphasis in that that's I
think more characteristic also of the
role men play in a family right because
men are for example men specialize in
rough and tumble play with their kids
it's rougher and it's it's it's more
encouraging it's less it's less
Sheltering and nurturing yeah the
mission is important too though right
like when like looking after your people
or doing like our number one priority
has to be the mission whatever your
mission is and so sometimes you know
you're going to have to send somebody
home because they're not Med great guy
you want to look after him or whatever
but the mission comes first and those
are decisions then that the nurturing
goes out the window whatever you the
hierarchy it's the mission is the most
important and that's a rough one that's
a rough and that goes back to something
you said a while ago with respect to um
again I'm I'm paraphrasing there's a
tension between the desire to do all of
these Progressive things and the
fundamental purpose of the institution
the institution is is Mission focused if
it's not Mission focused then why do you
have it right mil militaries exist to
fight yeah okay right I there you you if
you if you define it to do something
else or to be intimidating enough to
make fighting unnecessary well yeah
exactly that they're a
deterrent but and so this notion and you
said it earlier Barb you know it's like
well you can't have you can't have both
you know the the the the warrior culture
is in and of itself and we have this on
record and we have very prominent
Canadians who have written reports
saying that this is the heart of the
problem hang on well time out
mission is the heart of the problem
that's a problem it's how it may be
there may be a whole bunch of issues
around how things are being done not I'm
open to that conversation but the notion
that this is at its at its primordial
level a fundamental problem then you're
not talking about a military and this
goes to some or a country you want no
but I really think you you've hit the
the nail right on the head here you've
talked here's the problem is that we
have now put more emphasis on all those
Dei principles in the military and I
think they've been by the way they've
been uh and and you know it was really
her idea but I'm using it that that it's
been uh forced on the Canadian Forces
the military by the government yeah this
Progressive ideology and radical
Progressive ideology that this
government and and you know I'm not here
to talk polit politically but that's
what I think has happened and so the
forces are having to react to that and
unfortunately that has taken priority
over military Effectiveness military
operational capability and even though a
lot of our leaders are trying to stay
focused on that people like you know our
commander of the can joint uh operations
uh you know uh command you know he's
he's focused on operational capability
and he's having to he's forced to to
react to all this Dei business teamwork
I mean the military it's a team and so
and yet now all of a sudden this the the
emphasis is is on is on uh the
individual individual you know and you
don't even look like like and I and I
think what is wrong with looking like
the uniform should be uniform like you
don't the guy for the Montreal can I'm
going to wear my whe uniform tonight I'm
going to wear my home no you're all
going to wear the same uniform because
we're on the same team and so we've gone
away from that and now you're and now
we've taken you know meritocracy out so
that we can fill these imaginary quotas
of what is it3 or 3.2% of the population
we need to have a representative this
well I don't know about you but 30 m
doll jet I want the best person to fly
it I don't want because he fits this
quota or she or they I guess whatever it
is they fit this quota and and and how
and how then are you going to feel when
you are the best P but you don't get
chosen because you don't fit property
demoralized that's you don't fit the Dei
you don't fit a certain quota you don't
fit and okay for as long as we've been
around 71% of the Canadian military are
white males they are our Warrior
cultures they are the guys who you know
rough rough neck whatever you want to
call it the farmer Sons the fisherman
Sons the guys you know and they join the
military and so how and we spend not a
penny recruiting to these guys it's wor
it's worse than that by the way it's
worse than that we know that the best
predictor on the personality side for
military prowess is conscientiousness
okay conscientious people are
meritocratic based right that's their
hierarchy value so if you if you're
trying to get conscientious people into
the military which you need to do if
you're going to have a military then the
best way to dissuade them is
to set up an anti meritocratic operation
because they can't stand that they
they're the guys that are going to want
to go into the military and
incrementally improve so they can
advance forward through the ranks in a
dutiful patriotic orderly and Industrial
industrious manner that's
conscientiousness yeah and so and that
uniformity it's the same with business
suits like the idea was cuz a business
suit is a modified military uniform the
idea was to
signal that you're putting aside your
own IDI individual
idiosyncrasies for your fellow platoon
members let's say and the mission right
right and so it's not like you're
trivial CU you're not but your concerns
are not the concerns of the platoon or
the mission and you wear the uniform to
signify that and if you can't make that
sacrifice if you're unwilling to then
well go do your own thing
it's not like we have a draft well and
you know you can demonstrate your
individuality when you're in the
military but do it outside those times
when you're wearing the uniform you know
if you want to wear an earring when
you're on leave well go you know enjoy
yourself and and all that you know
that's got nothing to do with sexual
orientation or any this this business
I'm talking uniforms specifically and so
all those things forcing the Dei uh the
the emphasis on individuality over team
that is having a huge impact on morale
in the military well how do you know
that how recruitment would be one isue
we've seen we've seen actually the the
the Canan chaplain General has actually
gone out and spoken you know all his
Padres have gone out and he's come back
and he's you know I think it's about a
year ago that that he he said morale is
is shot I'm getting I'm getting
information from that in of itself is a
significant data point well right
believe this is reliable chaplain
General a huge this is inal this has
been typically a very private
organization that is focused on
spiritual wellbeing morale all of these
all of these extremely important but
subjective aspects of the institution to
go public and say when he writes a
report to the chief of Defense staff a
big fraking deal on top of that I'm
getting I and you probably do as well
from from former uh or serving uh
officers and soldiers who write to me
and say Hey listen you know morale is is
is horrible there are organizations now
run by veterans Young Veterans who who
kind of tell them you know tell all
those serving who can't speak out
publicly but they want to gather the
information and and the information I am
getting right now is that morale is is
shot one of the reasons is because they
see our senior leaders serving senior
leaders not fighting back against this
process that the government is is
forcing on takes out their faith in the
leaders takes out their faith in the
leadership they're saying holy crap you
know and and okay you're going to have
the odd one who likes to have his hair
long fine but you know when I joined I
had my hair down to my shoulders I had
my you know haircut I got a buzz cut and
everything and plus they're not it was
understood they're not seeing public
support they're not seeing they're not
seeing overt signals from the political
leadership that what they do actually
matters because the political leadership
is focused on those other metrics yeah
um the importance of service okay so
when the Prime Minister and Minister
Blair brought out the defense policy
update you read what the Prime Minister
said did he at any time in those in that
speech talk about the importance of
service the honor of serving your
country uh that it's a great place to
actually you know do something for
yourself but also for others and the
fundamental purpose the Armed Forces
again those are all conscientiousness
related virtues well so here's something
interesting on the political side a
so what Tils you towards a progressive
radicalism is high openness creativity
and low
conscientiousness what tilts you towards
a concern or there's no rules basically
do whatever you want well the idea there
would be is that that your best that's
think about it as an ecological niche so
for those people the ecological niche is
all that territory that hasn't been
ordered or the space where rules could
be changed or bent what the space of
novelty and like that's a great space to
occupy if you happen to be creative but
you're not a rule follower you don't you
tend not to be particularly patriotic
you're not dutiful you're not
conscientious you're not orderly there's
no loyalty there's no not not with
openness specifically no that comes with
conscientiousness and you know the fact
that you didn't see any testimony let's
say to those virtues in that speech is
an indication of the temperament of the
person and the political party that
offered those because that isn't what
they see as valuable and and and that's
hard on conscientious and this is not
you know the liberal party this is the
government of Canada okay so I I mean
agnostically you know this is this is
our boss this is the guy who runs the
country so and if he doesn't think
service is important if he doesn't think
that service honorable service in the
military is important well you know
because they Fates from there oh yeah
definitely because the rank and file are
struggling with all of these issues that
we've been discussing plus the realities
that they're being asked to be away from
their families their equipment is
rusting crap and they can always buy new
equipment themselves you right they're
they don't feel that the the
institutional leadership organizational
leadership is focused on the right
things and that I mean that exists in
every organization when you're at the
bottom and you're looking up you know
the tree full of mon the tree full of
monkeys what are you looking at yeah
yeah right um but the notion being that
there all of these things are
contributing yeah to a a Malay okay so
just before you go um so now coming back
to General karna being appointed she has
to leave this stuff behind now if she
wants to start making an an impact
immediately on the troops and that she's
going to have to now focus on you know
maybe what she we have not been focused
on you know the institutional she's now
the head of the institutional leadership
in the armed forces behind the culture
changes yeah exactly so she has a huge
challenge in front of her you know and
it's going to be interesting see the
challenge is will she be given the
Mandate the authority and the resources
that are necessary to use a nautical
term to write the ship right because if
not then we have squander we will have
squandered an incredible opportunity
which is to take a great leader who is a
warrior who has demonstrated her
professional competence and happens both
positively and negatively to be wearing
the the the bridal of first female to do
the job and we potentially squander it
because the
institution for other reasons will be no
better off at the end of her watch than
it was at the beginning well so it
sounds like it sounds like the three of
you have some faith in her fundamental
abilities well we we know her to some
degree she's a classmate of Barb yeah
from Military College up and so what I
so one of the things that I liked about
that I admired about Jenny in the early
days is back in the day for some reason
it seemed if you were a woman in the
military and you wanted to succeed in
this man's world well you better start
looking like one and talking like one
and there was these women and they left
behind whatever feminine traits or
qualities they had it was like the
minute you you don't hide that you're
not going to go anywhere and then Jenny
came along and uh she wanted to be a
combat engineer or a flamco dancer about
that was her two things right and so she
even as even when she was a full Colonel
she's done both yes so has a full
Colonel on you know we had the American
Idol or CMR Idol the takeoff for the
kids and mess and she did her dancing
she's a mother of four um you know and
she doesn't you know she doesn't want to
look like yeah she doesn't hide her
feminity so I like that about full
package there sow so she is um so how do
you account for the fact that she got
tangled up in this Dei this you know was
that was that like inevitable yeah they
created a command so they decided the
government forced this and I I will I
will say that it was forced upon us and
that you know oh there's it's horrible
the military there's it's misogynistic
it's Warrior patriarch blah blah blah so
we we have to change this so they
created a command and I think wasn't the
budget $500 million over five like you
know what we could have done with that
money and so she was yeah so she was the
chief of that of that command and they
had so so I look at what what happened
okay so they we tried Dei how's that
working out for us not great we're way
down we're still way down 16,000 in
Personnel um 16,000 out of how many
we're short so we should 16,000 probably
about 100,000 if you take the regular
and the reserves together so you're 15%
below where you should be and 15% by the
way in in Wartime 15% your unit is no
longer combat capable have to be pulled
back from the thing so you could
actually say that the armed forces are
non-combat capable to because of
there's a lot of math behind as well
because that's on paper and then you add
on the layer on top of this and a lot of
organizations have similar issues with
respect to even though you might be at
85% of that remaining 85% a bunch of
them are unavailable for a variety of
reasons from medical to
administrative well you're probably
looking at a number of several thousand
I se numbers as high as 8,000 not that
out of the remaining so another
10% of what's 20 I see I see you're
looking at a 20% shortfall at the moment
not just that but the the the people who
are missing are the the the center core
so that you've got your warrant your
sergeant your leftenant your cap
well experience took 20 years to get
there so even if you recruit 16,000
people tomorrow they're not going to
it's going to take them time to get
there for you know so and you know
technicians uh fighter pilots fighter
pilots have been down for for years and
years we've been well we can't we can't
even train them in Canada anymore so we
don't have yeah we don't have the
training but so so going back to the
culture change so it was a culture
strange that you can't find enough
fighter pilots I mean God you think that
unbelievable because but I'm going to
say to you that that is a that's a
function of the of Dei so I mean you so
the culture changed get rid of the the
way we think the way we behave that
whole Warrior mentality so that's where
the attrition went I think get she says
I'm done I'm not doing this she says
she's out so now we're implementing the
Dei so we're targeting this 2.3 whatever
quota the whatever you
nonbinary whatever you want to fill in
indigenous female whatever it is so
we're targeting this person so there's
my four fighter pilots Jord who are
lined up that want to join and they
don't even get a medical appointment
because I got quotas to
fill Men Are You Looking For Freedom are
there things in your life that are
holding you back from being the man that
you're called to be if you're looking to
build a life plan that is ordered
towards prayer and discipline alongside
other like-minded men then you need to
check out Exodus 90 app The Exodus 90
app offers a daily companion to help you
grow closer to God and to become the man
you want to be the man you need to be on
the app you can join thousands of men
for St Michael's lent which starts
August 15th and leads up to the Feast of
St Michael the Archangel on September
29th St Michael's lent is an ancient
tradition of prayer and fasting
popularized by St Francis in the Middle
Ages that's been lost in our time let's
bring it back join the men of Exodus 90
and father Carlos Martins Catholic
priest and host of The Exorcist files
who will serve as our spiritual guide
for St Michael's lent this year on The
Exodus 90 app we will awaken to
Invisible realities and enter into the
spiritual battle that rages around us
all the time go to Exodus 90.com jbp for
a 14-day free trial of The Exodus 90 app
and learn more about St Michaels lent
that's Exodus 90.com jbp to join us for
St Michaels lent starting August 5th
15 you know the fundamental problem with
that especially as you stop start
stacking up the intersectional
requirements is that you actually end up
with no candidate pool right because
first of all your candidate pool for
fighter pilots is going to be very
restricted to begin with right so then
the next question would be well are
there any of those Dei candidates even
hypothetically available and the answer
to that is likely no and even if there
were the probability that they'll be
qualified or interested is vanishingly
small yeah you know so I mean in even in
the academic realm when we
were as long as I was an academic as
long as I'd been an academic if you were
a minority you had more than a fighting
chance with the hiring Community like
seriously more of a Fighting Chance it
was pretty much your position to lose
but all that meant still was that there
was no way we could we could come to the
kind of parody that was required by the
people who think that you know every
category has to be filled there just
wasn't the the people just weren't there
they just didn't exist and you couldn't
make them out of whole cloth exactly and
so so a 20% decrement okay so we started
this out and we have to draw this to a
close fairly soon we started this out
with something we didn't probably
emphasize enough which was the nature of
the crisis now you know we alluded to
the fact that Canada let's say is
woefully unprepared now on the classic
military front also with regard to all
the new forms of warfare that are
multiplying faster than people can even
imagine that we have a widespread
problem of demoralization and that
recruitment is not working okay so but I
didn't get the sense that we did a
sufficiently good job of telling
Canadians that you know there's smoke
and fire it's like that this is a real
problem and so like what do you feel are
the
consequences even the short-term
consequences let's say of Canada
continuing to be unprepared in this
manner so this goes to intervention
early in the conversation about this
notion of a perfect storm so at the very
moment at in time that this period in
time when we have the the dimensions of
the crisis that you've just
summarized we are incapable therefore of
participating contributing and doing our
fair share for lack of a better
characterization in a global system that
needs us right so we look incompetent
just at minimum what so at a minimum we
look incompetent or disinterested pick
one yeah neither of them is a
particularly good look for a G7 country
yeah right right then we have the actual
practical challenges around the security
issues we look at our ability to
contribute or not to the alliance are we
doing enough we never are doing enough
we're doing what we can but that is
insufficient
um and so the implication from a
Canadian perspective is that Canada that
depends as much if not more than many
other countries in the world on these
Global Systems for our way of life is
unable to make any meaningful
contribution to the preservation
reinforcement and ultimately protection
of all of these systems right and so but
that's a hard sell and I get why it's a
hard cell which is why and this is a
very
personal plea I do not believe not
withstanding the need for Canadians to
understand this that this should be an
interest of or this should be an issue
of public interest or public opinion and
I have told political leaders who will
listen to me that if you are following
public opinion on these issues you are
not leading and this is an issue of my
Su too is that if the public was
informed as we're attempting to do now
that the discovery would be that far
more Canadians especially of the
conservative and classic liberal bent
would be behind intelligent intelligent
policy related to the military I can
only you know 100% support what Mark's
saying if a government wants to govern
for Canada for all Canadians and this is
the right thing to do to have armed
forces that can protect Canadians but
also in intervene in in internationally
wherever we want you need to be able to
spend the money some social programs are
going to have to be lessened you know in
terms of of how much we spend on them
but it's always you know guns butter you
can have both and right now we don't
have enough guns frankly that's that's
where we are today or people holding
guns holding or butter but or butter
yeah but but the point is and I agree
with you 100% as well that if a
government decided that then it's a
matter of going out in telling Canadians
it has to start at the top though again
I say the Prime Minister when he of our
country doesn't matter what persuasion
he is you know doesn't even talk about
it when we talk he talks about the
defense policy update it's going to be
good it's going to get closer to 2% no
one cares about that for the moment we
need somebody who cares about service to
our country who's going to make service
an honorable thing for people to do
who's going to fund the military who's
going to improve morale and so on and I
think if you explain it to Canadians
they will understand M yeah and we need
the leaders themselves the ones in
uniform are going to have
to Buck up a little bit can I see I was
gonna say something else but I'll say
grow up there I'm not gonna say that but
fair enough okay so so why is what all
right yes now we talked at the beginning
a little bit about the fact that look I
know that the military personnel the
leadership in particular are
fundamentally supposed to shut the hell
up about political matters and they are
in a very strict chain of command and by
and large they should stay there but you
three who should know have indicated
that we have something on our hands at
in the order of a crisis and I I don't
imagine you're like Chicken Little sky
is falling sort of people and so at some
point it becomes incumbent on people who
are attempting to serve the country to
bring such things to the attention of
Canadians and so why why is that not
happening as much as it might in Europe
well I think that again I I you know not
political but I think that our our
military like I I watch on television in
the last few years where there's an
announcement about the military and
Wayne A's not even there our chief of
Defense staff is not it's it's Anita Nan
that's making the announcement the
ministers making the announcement beside
the Prime Minister what the hell like
you know you look at the Americans and
there's the The Joint Chief the chairman
of the Joint Chiefs he's there beside
him or indicates so so I think that I
think that I don't know maybe the
generals are going to need to say okay
like you know no this is still my ship
my my armed forces and I need to have
more of a say and and I don't know I I
think the next government that's going
to be more likely because this
government just seemed to find the idea
of a uniform somehow unsavory and hid it
away I mean when was the last time that
had uniform I might say but when was the
last time you saw a rick hiler for
example up there calling them scumbags
and whatever else and him saying yeah
well you know you can talk to the and
and people listening Canadians were
enamorate of that and you need to Hero
everybody loves a hero and and we're not
producing enough we're not show we have
Heroes but we're not showing them enough
well then on that front too like you
talked about three gentlemen whose
careers were demolished um the three
senior officers art McDonald Danny
forant and Steve Wayan right and the
name of culture change and so my
suspicions are that that sort of action
is also quite likely to dissuade people
from having something to say I and
probably well I I I'm not sure about
that I we have an example and I'll talk
about you know the vice admiral octone
and vice admiral uh topi two senior you
know three star Admirals um topi
commands the Navy currently and he made
a video about I want to say about a year
ago maybe nine months ago where he
talked about the challenges of the Navy
now as a leader that's what you want to
do you want to inform your troops you
want to make sure you communicate with
them that okay things are tough boys and
girls but you know there's there's stuff
coming down the pipe and you know he did
what a good leader would do I'm sure the
government was very unhappy with him
releasing that video If you haven't seen
it you need to see it the other guy is
uh is octone so what's the video the
video is the Royal Canadian Navy
commander makes a video about the state
of the Navy today how long is that video
I think six minutes maybe six minutes
but it's excellent will you send me the
link to that maybe we'll put it on this
show sure I if that would be useful sure
I can
the other guy is is Bob oone so he
commands He commands the Canadian joint
Operations Command He commands all the
military operations outside and inside
the country he's kind of the Mr operator
he does that on behalf of the chief of
Defense staff so he he was in an
interview I don't know with whom but he
he met he talked about you know the
world today and he talked about because
he's the guy that gets all the
intelligence and and he talked about the
dangers the threats to our country and
so on and so forth and he was very open
and he said you know Canadians don't
realize how dangerous the world is today
that was another video or that is mainam
mainstream media interview uh in one of
the papers I believe but the notion
being that there are little pockets uh
of people who were speaking speaking out
and I was always told I don't know if
you same with you but when you when the
media would come around and they would
say can we talk to your soldiers the
soldiers knew they could talk about what
they were doing exactly what they you
couldn't talk about I hate the policy of
the government on this you know and
frankly when I look at what topi did and
I look at what drct Looney did they
talked about their job talk you know my
job is the operator and I my job is to
know what's going on in the world and I
don't think people understand that this
is going on the other guy toi he said
well what's going on in my command I'm
telling you troops and I'm sure he did
it for his Sailors he did it was and it
was really good so so your point is is
that there is a way for military leaders
to speak out to inform the PO population
and their own men and women about what's
going on without becoming without
stepping outside of the chain of
Commander be exact loyalty is the key
here however the government sometimes
says no yeah yeah you're not allow well
the government can also be pushed back
when they're out of their baywick so but
your your sense is that there is a there
is a place there where public
pronouncements are appropriate and
possible and that you've seen some of
them I yeah yeah okay well so let's
close with this I'll just give give each
of you a a a chance for a closing
statement to speak directly to the
Canadian public and also the
International Community because there'll
be lots of people who aren't Canadian
watching this as well so just anything
at all what would you like to emphasize
let's say Barbara maybe you could start
what would you like to emphasize let's
say to young women possibly considering
a career young women today they're a lot
stronger when you think from the from
the interactions I've had with our young
officer cadetes and I I would say ladies
you know there's nothing to be afraid of
you've got this join the military you
are going to have you know the
experience of a lifetime you can learn
to be and do whatever you want to do and
don't listen to um too many negative
comments because you can handle this we
handled it back then you can handle it
today that would be my comment to them
okay well I I would say uh for me I
think uh service to your country and
service in the military is a fantastic
career and and I think any young man or
woman who doesn't actually consider it
at at least consider it not necessarily
do it but consider it have a look at
what's available out there and and look
at it compared to civilian employment I
think you're missing out and okay so let
me zero in on that a little bit so let's
take um kid who's just about to graduate
from high school starting to figure out
maybe from a small town or a city for
that matter trying to figure out what to
do next okay so why exactly do you think
the military might be on his or her list
of of consideration and who for what
kind of student should be thinking well
if if first of all if you've got good
marks and you're in fairly decent
physical shape then uh then being in an
an officer and if you're in high school
you're going to look at going to
University if you're going to go to
university let's say and if you don't
want to go to university first of all
you could join as a soldier sailor air
you know Aviator or whatever great
career you can have great my son is in
the in the Navy my daughter's in the uh
in the Army in the reserves uh they've
had great careers they love it however
if you're looking at G University have a
look at what the Military College
provides you yeah right okay it's a
four-pillar program you'll get a degree
you're going to get military leadership
uh experience because they're going to
give you teach you and so on you're
going to get be bilingual they're going
to teach you how to be how to to speak
your other language and you're also
going to be in great shape because it's
it's a four-pillar program physically
and you'll get paid for
doing and then what you have to do is
serve the number of years that you go to
Military College after that you can get
out and do whatever you'd like however
if you decide to if you decide to get
out let's say what a great CV you have
what a great curriculum V you've got you
know you've got experience you've got a
degree you've got some leadership you've
got you're in great shape etc etc so
right so that's just available for
people if if that's not your path then
um join and get a trade right there's
there's literally over a hundred
different occupations available in the
military from how would people go find
about finding this out so there's going
to be school online it's all online now
and every one of those those uh those uh
occupations they have a little video a
three-minute video you see what would
you be doing if you were this right and
some of them have literally some of them
have three or four years of intensive
academic qualifications technical skills
um and then you combine it with with
work and if you're not interested in
that then there's lots of opportunity
for what I would characterize as simple
adventure and opportunity to just do
really fun and cool things um
potentially on the other side of the
world um and and get some good
experience and build some great
relationships that will last you for the
rest of your life absolutely yeah um so
was that the end of your that's it my
friend that was your well that was good
that was a good that well that's a good
positive so I my message would be uh
what I was trying to say
earlier Canadians need to understand
that notwithstanding all of the real
challenges that that they're faced with
on a day-to-day basis in this country we
still enjoy an incredible level of
privilege and and wealth and that is
fragile we can never take that for
granted and part of not taking that for
granted is that we are part of a very
complicated global system that depends
on a whole bunch of things yep that
depend on security as the
foundational element of Economics of uh
social uh um fairness and equality the
rule of law all these things that are
important to us as Canadians both
domestically or internationally are
premised on a secure global system that
system is under threat it is real
and that is where the vulnerability and
threat is to Canada it's not a physical
threat in the form of an invasion yeah
which many new Canadians may have lived
in their own experience it's not that
it's deeper it's broader it's a little
more esoteric it's another kind of
invasion but it is real and it is coming
and we either want to be part of the
answer with respect to how we protect it
or we're going to wake up one morning
and wonder where what we thought Canada
was all about went went yeah okay okay
well I so I think what we'll do on the
daily wi side for everybody watching
listening I think we'll delve a little
bit more deeply into the idology and the
the Dei mess and how that came about and
what might be done about it and maybe
also talk a little bit more about the
the problems of security in the digital
world and so if you want to join us on
the daily wi side please feel free to do
that and thank you very much for your
time and attention thank you very much
for coming pleasure yeah well one of
many conversations I hope and to
everybody watching and listening thank
you very much for your time and
attention as well
[Music]